README.md, before:

# saferis

[![Scala CI](https://github.com/russwyte/saferis/actions/workflows/scala.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/russwyte/saferis/actions/workflows/scala.yml)
[![Maven Repository](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.github.russwyte/saferis_3?logo=apachemaven)](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.github.russwyte/saferis)

*The name is derived from 'safe' and 'eris' (Greek for 'strife' or 'discord')*

**Saferis mitigates the discord of unsafe SQL.** A type-safe, resource-safe SQL client library for Scala 3 and ZIO.

## Key Features

- **SQL Injection Protection** - Safe SQL interpolator with compile-time validation
- **Multi-Database Support** - Works with PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, and any JDBC database
- **Type-Safe Capabilities** - Operations only available when your database supports them
- **Resource Safety** - Guaranteed connection and transaction management with ZIO
- **Label-Based Decoding** - Column-to-field mapping by name, not position
- **Compile-Time Validation** - Table schemas, column names, and SQL verified at compile time
- **Type-Safe Pagination** - Efficient offset and cursor-based pagination with PageSpec

## Installation

Add to your `build.sbt`:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.github.russwyte" %% "saferis" % "<version>"
```

## Database Dialects

Saferis provides compile-time guarantees that operations are only available when your database supports them:

| Feature | PostgreSQL | MySQL | SQLite |
|---------|------------|-------|--------|
| RETURNING clause | Yes | No | Yes |
| JSON operations | Yes | Yes | No |
| Array types | Yes | No | No |
| UPSERT | Yes | No | No |

Switch databases by changing one import - your code adapts automatically:

```scala
import saferis.*                 // PostgreSQL (default)
import saferis.mysql.{given}     // Override with MySQL
import saferis.sqlite.{given}    // Override with SQLite
```

See the [full documentation](docs/docs/DOCUMENTATION.md) for:
- Complete API reference
- Running examples with real database output
- Dialect system details
- DDL and DML operations
- Advanced pagination patterns

## License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Unified Query builder replaces JoinSpec and PageSpec
- Add Query[A] as single entry point for all query operations
- Support up to 5-table joins with type-safe ON clauses
- Add type-safe WHERE clauses with selector syntax
- Add IN/NOT IN subqueries with compile-time type matching
- Add EXISTS/NOT EXISTS subqueries including correlated
- Add derived tables via Query.from(subquery, alias)
- Rename JoinOperator -> Operator, JoinCondition -> Condition
- Remove Join.scala, PageSpec.scala and their tests
- Update documentation to use new Schema DSL for FK/indexes
- Remove deprecated @indexed, @uniqueIndex, @unique annotations from docs

README.md, after:

# saferis

[![Scala CI](https://github.com/russwyte/saferis/actions/workflows/scala.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/russwyte/saferis/actions/workflows/scala.yml)
[![Maven Repository](https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/io.github.russwyte/saferis_3?logo=apachemaven)](https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/io.github.russwyte/saferis)

*The name is derived from 'safe' and 'eris' (Greek for 'strife' or 'discord')*

**Saferis mitigates the discord of unsafe SQL.** A type-safe, resource-safe SQL client library for Scala 3 and ZIO.

## Key Features

- **SQL Injection Protection** - Safe SQL interpolator with compile-time validation
- **Multi-Database Support** - Works with PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite, and any JDBC database
- **Type-Safe Capabilities** - Operations only available when your database supports them
- **Resource Safety** - Guaranteed connection and transaction management with ZIO
- **Label-Based Decoding** - Column-to-field mapping by name, not position
- **Compile-Time Validation** - Table schemas, column names, and SQL verified at compile time
- **Unified Query Builder** - Type-safe joins, subqueries, and pagination in one fluent API

## Installation

Add to your `build.sbt`:

```scala
libraryDependencies += "io.github.russwyte" %% "saferis" % "<version>"
```

## Database Dialects

Saferis provides compile-time guarantees that operations are only available when your database supports them:

| Feature | PostgreSQL | MySQL | SQLite |
|---------|------------|-------|--------|
| RETURNING clause | Yes | No | Yes |
| JSON operations | Yes | Yes | No |
| Array types | Yes | No | No |
| UPSERT | Yes | No | No |

Switch databases by changing one import - your code adapts automatically:

```scala
import saferis.*                 // PostgreSQL (default)
import saferis.mysql.{given}     // Override with MySQL
import saferis.sqlite.{given}    // Override with SQLite
```

See the [full documentation](docs/docs/DOCUMENTATION.md) for:
- Complete API reference
- Running examples with real database output
- Dialect system details
- DDL and DML operations
- Advanced pagination patterns

## License

[Apache 2.0](LICENSE)
